---
layout: post
title:  "Are Presidential Inversions Inevitable?"
date:   2019-06-20 21:53:39 -0700
categories: electoral college
---
**JONATHAN R. CERVAS** _University of California, Irvine_  
**BERNARD GROFMAN** _University of California, Irvine_  

---  

**To cite this article:** Cervas, Jonathan R., & Bernard Grofman. (2019). "Are Presidential Inversions Inevitable?: Comparing Eight Counterfactual Rules for Electing the US President." _Social Science Quarterly_. 1-21.  

Published Online: 2019 [https://doi.org/10.1111/ssqu.12634](https://doi.org/10.1111/ssqu.12634)

**Abstract:**  We offer a typology of possible reforms to the Electoral College in terms of
changes  to  its  two  most  important  structural  features:   seat  allocations  that  are  not
directly  proportional  to  population  and  winner-take-all  outcomes  at  the  state  level.
This  typology  allows  us  to  classify  four  major  variants  of  “reform”  to  the  present
Electoral College in a parsimonious fashion.  Many of the proposals we consider have
been  suggested  by  well  known  figures,  some  debated  in  Congress,  and  they  include
what we view as most likely to be taken seriously.  We evaluate these proposals solely
in  terms  of  one  simple  criterion:  ‘Would  they  be  expected  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of
inversions  between  EC  and  popular  vote  outcomes?’.    We  answer  this  question  by
looking  at  the  data  on  actual  presidential  election  outcomes  at  the  state  level  over
the  entire  period  1868–2016,  and  at  the  congressional  district  level  over  the  period
1956–2016.   We consider the implications for presidential outcomes of these different
alternative mechanisms, in comparison to the actual electoral outcome and the popular
vote outcome. In addition, we consider the implications of a proposal to increase the size
of the U.S. House (Ladewig and Jasinski 2008).  Our results show that inversions from
the popular vote happen under all proposed alternatives at nearly the same rate as under
the  current  Electoral  College  rules,  with  some  proposals  actually  making  inversions
more frequent. The major difference between the present EC rule and alternative rules is
NOT in frequency of inversions, but it is in which particular years the inversions occur.
As for the proposal to increase the size of the House, we show that any realistic increase
in House size would have made no difference for the 2016 outcome.  


“_The Electoral College is a disaster for democracy._”
**Donald Trump** (November 6, 2012)

“_The Electoral College is actually genius in that it brings all states, including the smaller ones, into play._”
**President‐Elect Donald Trump** (November 15, 2016)


# Introduction  

The Electoral College (EC) we know today is not the one envisioned by the founders. The founders believed its function would be to nominate candidates, from which nominees the House of Representatives would select. Today, electors are pledged in advance to particular candidates and Electors very rarely diverge from their pledged support, and they never have done so in a way that has proved consequential (Longley and Peirce, 1999:23–24). Moreover, outcomes are decided in the first stage of the process, in the EC itself. Only once has the responsibility for choosing the president shifted to the second runoff stage, which involves a congressional vote.1

As eminent scholar Robert Dahl (2003) noted, “the elaborate machinery of the electoral college [became] little more than a way of counting votes.” Nonetheless, despite these differences in how the EC now operates, its two most basic features have remained in place: seat allocations that are not fully proportional to population, with allocations based on the combination of congressional seats and U.S. Senate seats in the state; and winner‐take‐all (unit‐rule) outcomes at the state level—though now there are two states, Maine and Nebraska, where the winner‐take‐all feature operates at the level of congressional districts, with only the two “federal” seats allocated on the basis of the state‐wide outcome.2
In Federalist, No. 68, Alexander Hamilton opined about the EC, “I … hesitate not to affirm that if the manner of it be not perfect, it is at least excellent.” Both then and now, most agree that the EC is indeed far from perfect.3

The claim that it is “excellent” would be met with far more suspicion. In the United States, after each presidential election, especially those where popular and EC vote diverged,4 or a third‐party candidacy threatens to undermine the idea that a president should represent a clear majority, proposals to abolish/replace the EC are common. Indeed, Article II, Section 1 (i.e., the EC) is the provision of the U.S. Constitution that has most often had changes proposed to it (Longley and Braun, 1972:42–43; Hardaway, 1994; Longley and Peirce, 1999:133). The academic literature is also full of attacks on the EC (see, e.g., Edwards, 2011; Finkelman, 2002; Dahl, 2003; Bennett, 2006; Abbott and Levine, 1991),5 though it does have a few defenders (see, e.g., Best, 1975; Diamond, 1977; Hardaway, 1994; Miller, 2012b; Polsby et al., 2012; Ross, 2012). And yet, since the adoption of the 12th amendment, there have been no further changes to its structure, and attempts to eliminate the EC have proved unavailing.6

There are many reasons why reformers have been unsuccessful. First, the winner of the previous election has little incentive to change the rules that elected him (see the Trump quotes above; see also Bowler, Donovan, and Karp, 2006). Second, large states think that they benefit from the EC because the winner‐take‐all rule makes their state more likely to be pivotal (Banzhaf, 1968), while small states think they benefit from the EC because of the two‐seat Senate “bonus.”7

Third, public opinion is closely divided (with a strong partisan split).8 Fourth, as noted above, the academic and journalistic community has its skeptics about EC reform, with those in opposition to change noting, among other things, that proposed remedies have unknown qualities and are unlikely to cure problems such as a campaign focus on the larger states, and may bring new problems with them, for example, party proliferation, and blackmail potential by minor parties now able to win pledged electors whose vote switches could determine a presidential election outcome (see, e.g., Ross, 2012; DeWitt and Schwartz, 2016; see also Grofman and Feld, 2005). Fifth, there is little innovation by way of unique ideas for reform (Longley and Braun, 1972), and it is far from clear what constituency a reformer would be trying to persuade.9 Finally, after an election, attention quickly shifts to other more pressing issues and EC reform goes off the political agenda.10
There are many complaints about the EC, such as the claim that virtually all presidential campaign activity is focused on a very limited number of battleground states in a way that affects turnout and interest in politics such as to depress both; and there are always renewed fears about wayward electors,11 however, we believe it fair to say that far and away the single most important criticism of the EC is that it does not guarantee the election of the national popular vote winner.12 We also recognize that a direct popular vote election for the presidency also has its critics (Best, 1975; Gringer, 2008). Opponents of change to the popular vote note the possibility of a bitterly divided and close election, not unlike those we have experienced much of the past few decades and reminiscent of the late 1800s.13 The EC delivers decisive victories,14 while a close direct vote might lead to a nationwide recount that might take months or even years to complete, leaving the country in a constitutional crisis.15 Another issue is based on the expectation that a national popular vote would dramatically increase the incentives for candidate proliferation.

While we recognize that there are many dimensions along which the EC and proposed alternatives to it could be evaluated, both in normative and empirical terms, here we evaluate eight key alternative proposals, and in Appendix C, a proposed change in size of the House of Representatives, solely in terms of one simple criterion: “Would they be expected to reduce the likelihood of inversions between EC and popular vote outcomes?” Although this criterion serves double duty, we eschew the normative standard and focus on the empirical. We address the empirical question by looking at the data on actual presidential election outcomes at the state level16 over the entire period 1868–2016, and at the congressional‐district level over the period 1956–2016, taking turnout levels and vote choice as given.17 The normative aspect is well‐plowed ground in the previous EC literature and is not repeated here.18 There are a number of books and articles comparing the present EC rules to proposed alternatives, but none of which we are aware that both use a time series going back to 1868 and include the 2016 election, and none that empirically evaluate as many alternatives to the present EC rules as are considered here (see, e.g., Longley and Braun, 1972; Hardaway, 1994; Grofman and Feld, 2005; Polsby et al., 2012; Koza et al., 2013; cf. Barthélémy et al. 2014, whom we consider among the most thoughtful and detailed empirical analysis and the one most closely resembling this article's analyses). Moreover, many studies only write about the EC in normative, legal, and theoretical terms, or discuss the prospects for change, and provide no attempt at empirically estimating how a particular change in rule would have affected past voting outcomes (Wilmerding, 1958; Bickel, 1968; Glennon, 1992).19 The goal of this article is to examine possible reforms to the EC in terms of the consequence of changes to its two most important structural features: seat allocations that are not directly proportional to population and winner‐take‐all outcomes at the state level. This typology allows for a parsimonious way to classify the reforms that have been or are likely to be taken seriously, including those that have actually previously been debated in Congress. In addition, we examine the implications of a proposal to increase the size of the U.S. House (Ladewig and Jasinski, 2008). Quite to our surprise, our empirical results show that over the full time period, inversions from the popular vote happen under all proposed alternatives at nearly the same rate as under the current EC rules, with some proposals actually making inversions more frequent. The major difference between the present EC rule and alternative rules is not in frequency of inversions, but in which particular years they occur. As for the proposal to increase the size of the House, we show that any realistic increase in House size would have made no difference for the 2016 outcome.

We utilize only the Democratic and Republican two‐party vote shares in looking at outcomes under different EC formulae. We make the choice of two‐party vote despite the fact that third‐party candidacies sometimes represent a large proportion of the total vote, such as in 1968, when the leading popular vote recipient, Richard Nixon, won just 43.42 percent of the total votes.20

The effects of third‐party candidacies on electoral outcomes is certainly worth further investigation but is beyond the scope of the present essay. Moreover, we expect that most, if not all, of the problems identified with third‐party candidacies would be the same or greater under the alternative versions of the EC we consider here. Of course, we recognize that candidates will adapt strategies to the rules in use, and that a priori rules may affect candidate entry decisions, but we still believe it a worthwhile exercise to examine how the previous voting patterns would have affected outcomes in the 38 presidential elections we review. However, because of such estimation complexities, we must interpret the results, such as shown in Table 2, as ceteris paribus ones.21

### Proposals for Electoral College Reform

The EC is often thought of as having two undesirable design features.22
The first of these is the allocation of EC seats in each state on a winner‐take‐all basis rather than either allocating candidate votes proportionally on a state‐by‐state basis, or nationally in the form of a direct popular vote. The second design feature is the way in which EC votes are allocated to each state, with objections to the two‐state federal bonus as generating malapportionment, and thus overweighting or underweighting certain states. Many critics of the EC would be satisfied only if both features were eliminated and the EC was replaced with direct popular election of the president; others are prepared to see modifications made in one or both features.

While most of the current attention on EC reform has been centered on the state compact to bind electors to vote for the national popular vote winner,23 many other more limited proposals for changing the EC have been introduced.24 In addition to replacing the present EC either with an election based on winning the national vote (though usually with a runoff rule if the plurality victory margin is not above some threshold), or replacing it with a scheme that makes the EC allocation to the candidates in each state more proportional to each candidate's share of the state‐wide vote, there have been many different alternatives proposed.25 We aim for a simple and parsimonious means to classify proposed reforms. We do so by focusing on the two key structural feature of the present EC identified above: seat allocations that are not directly proportional to population and winner‐take‐all outcomes at the state level. However, we do not include in our set the proposals the interstate compact that binds the states to report a slate of electors consistent with the popular vote outcome, even though that proposal has recently attracted a lot of attention, since that is simply the popular vote outcome by another mechanism. We also do not include proposals that require voters to rank‐order candidates because a lack of data on the preference ordering of candidates among the electorate makes it impossible for us to reliably estimate the implications of their use in past elections.

While this simple classification lends itself naturally to a 2 × 2 format, there are variants within each element that we wish to take into account, such as keeping the winner‐take‐all feature, but applying it at the level of congressional districts.26

Similarly, when we consider ways to make EC results more proportional, we need to distinguish between allocations based on House seat share and allocations based strictly on population.27 Additionally, we offer two types of proportional representation, one that allows for fractional shares of EC seats, the other awarding only whole seats. The whole‐number proportionality rule used is the same that is used for apportionment of the House of Representatives, namely, the method of equal proportions.28 In the latter, whole electors are allocated, which allows for the continued physical meeting of electors in December at their representative state legislatures.29 Though not usually called so, the direct national popular vote is the most pure form of proportional representation. It creates an EC the size of the electorate (with the exception of needing a majority, as a simple plurality would suffice), but since it is also winner‐take‐all, it appears as nonproportional.

What we end up with are 10 institutional procedures for aggregating votes, including the current EC and the popular vote. Using this simple classification scheme allows us to capture almost all the reforms that have been or are likely to be taken seriously, including those that have actually previously been debated in Congress. In toto, we offer three versions where the state‐level unit‐rule is maintained and seven variants where the unit‐rule is eliminated or altered. These 10 total electoral rules include four that keep the state‐wide two‐seat bonus (1, 4, 6, 8 in Table 1), six that eliminate the bonus (2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10), and three that eliminate electors (5, 7, 10). We provide in Appendix B a section a procedure that reallocates the number of Electors based on the ideal size of the U.S. House, namely, one based on the cube root of the population. Table 1 identifies each of the 10 variants with their structural features identified. We provide a more technical description of each of these options in mathematical notation.

#### Table 1. Variants of Electoral College Reform

Table 1. Variants of Electoral College Reform
Table 1. Variants of Electoral College Reform
+District‐level winner‐take‐all rule. *The number of inversion is five (31.25 percent) for the 16 elections for which we have district‐level data. In comparison, in the full set of 38 elections, there are at most four inversions (10.5 percent).

Table 2 shows actual popular vote and EC vote shares and also simulated seat share under each of our additional eight EC variants. Cells that are in bold Shaded cells show inversion years.

#### Table 2. Concordance of Popular Vote with Winner in 10 Variants of the Electoral College


###### Note: Percentages are of the Democratic candidate using the alternative rules. All calculations are of the two‐party vote. Shaded cells are those in which the new rule disagrees with the popular vote.

There are a number of interesting results shown in Table 2. First, malapportionment effects, and especially the effects of the two‐state bonus, are not that large. For example, in 2016, Donald Trump would have been elected even had there been no two‐seat bonus. In fact, he would have won in all the different unit‐rule configurations, only losing when a proportional rule such as the popular vote is instituted. Indeed, as can be derived from the differences between Columns 2 and 3 of  Table 2, in only three elections in American history has the two‐seat bonus feature of the EC been decisive in reversing an election result. The first time this happened was in 1876 when the two‐seat bonus benefited the Republican candidate,30 then again in 1916 when it benefited the Democratic candidate, and finally again in 2000 when it benefited the Republican candidate. However, we observe that the over the last seven elections, the two‐seat bonus has consistently favored the Republican candidate, even when it has not had an impact on election outcome. On the other hand, glancing through Table 2's first two columns reveals several instances where a reversal almost happened. In most of these instances, the Democratic candidate came out on top, for example, in 1960.31

Second, while proportionality variants of EC allocations clearly can dramatically change the magnitude of seat outcomes relative to vote outcomes, it is only in the period from 1880 to 1900 that we see repeated evidence of changes in the presidential winner based on choice of a proportional as opposed to a winner‐take‐all rule, though, of course, we also see this in 2000 and 2016.

Third, we note that the “reform” that would have the most dramatic effect on recent elections is a winner‐take‐all rule based on district outcomes. In recent elections where a Democratic Party candidate won the election, such a rule would reverse the EC. That such inversions provide net benefits to the Republican Party can be explained by the degree to which Democratic voting strength is inefficiently concentrated in urban districts (Chen and Rodden, 2013), and the degree to which there is greater Republican unified control of state legislatures and governorship than is true for Democrats, giving Republicans a much greater opportunity to engage in successful partisan gerrymandering of congressional district lines.32

In 1960, 1976, and 2012, for example, the outcomes would have been reversed (all three times benefiting the Republican candidate) if we allocated based on the results withincongressional districts plus the plurality state winner getting two bonus seats.33 In 1976, however, not giving the two‐seat bonus to the state plurality winner reverses yet again back to the actual winner, Jimmy Carter (i.e., benefits the Democratic candidate).

Fourth, if we want to understand inversions we must look to when popular vote elections are close. As mathematician Sam Merrill has argued, inversions are essentially a coin‐flip as the popular vote approaches 50 percent (Merrill, 1978).

An EC Based on an Expanded U.S. House

Now we turn to the last structural variation on the present EC rules that we consider. Ladewig and Jasinski (2008), drawing on ideas in Taagepera (1972), have proposed that the House size should be decennially adjusted to equal the cube root of U.S. population.34
The cube root of the U.S. population in 2010 was
. Using this House size, a congressional seat's average size would be just 458,262 people.35 As it turns out, this would have ensured that, had congressional size been increased in 2010 according to this formula, even the smallest state would have received at least one congressional seat based solely on the state population. How would EC malapportionment and outcome effects change if we increased the size of the House to make the allocation rule in that body more nearly proportional to the population of the state using the cube root of population to determine House size?
One way in which House size could become determinative is when a reversal actually happens, so the popular vote winner has lost the election. Under this circumstance, as the House size grows to approximate the population size, eventually the popular vote winner will also win the EC. Recalculating the 2016 election for a House size of 676 (but now excluding the two bonus seats for each senator) yields Donald Trump 380 of the 676 electors (56.2 percent). Again, as with the current EC and the version that simply omitted the bonus Senate‐based electors, Trump would still have won the White House even if the House size were 676. In this EC rule, he wins by 84 electors. Although this is a larger number of seats, the EC is also larger. Since Trump won 306 of 538 (56.8 percent) electors in 2016, his percentage would, as expected, slightly decrease under the cube root rule.
Trump won a plurality in the majority of states, so the same Trump victory still occurs if we add in the two‐seat “federal bonus.” In 2016, for House size to matter required a House size so huge as to be unrealistic: the effects of increasing House size do not affect the outcome in 2016 for any House size under at least 800 (data omitted for space reasons). In Appendix B, we also include a table that compares the popular vote and EC under present apportionment with those using the cube root rule of assembly size for the entire time period of our study.36

In the year 1912, the cube root EC size is actually larger than the actual EC size. In 2000, an increase in the size of the House could have mattered in that, in most House sizes starting above 493, including all of them above 655 (the cube root law value), the popular vote winner, Gore, would also have won the EC, a result previously pointed out by Neubauer and Zeitlin (2003). The years in which a cube root allocation would have changed the outcomes are limited to just 1876 and 2000, which were already reversed, thus reducing inversions by two.37

# Discussion

A reporter once asked legendary singer/actor Maurice Chevalier: “Mr. Chevalier, how does it feel to have reached the ripe old age of  70?” Without hesitation, Chevalier responded to the reporter: “Old age isn't so bad when you consider the alternative!” Using election results from the period 1868 to 2016, we have constructed a total of 13 counterfactual variants on the EC for the purpose of comparing the actual EC results and popular votes with those from various proposed reforms. Presidential elections have seen four occasions in the modern political party era of American history in which outcomes of the popular vote and the EC vote diverge, with two of these coming within the past two decades. While some may argue that even once is too much, others view the relatively small number of inversions as vindication for the founders (Hardaway, 1994). If we look at modifications to the EC such as eliminating the two‐state bonus, allowing for a more proportional distribution of electors, or switching to House‐district‐based outcomes, we discover that at best they reduce the number of inversions by one, from four to three and, at worst, with the House‐district‐based outcomes, they actually increase the number of inversions. Moreover, with the partial exception of 2016, the years in which inversions occur under alternative EC arrangements are different from those in which they occurred under present EC rules. Thus, changing the rules in the ways identified above seems to serve no useful purpose. It does not eliminate or even substantially reduce the prevalence of inversions; all it does is change the years in which they occur. We also considered the implications of a proposal by Ladewig and Jasinski (2008) to increase the size of the House (and thus of the EC) by picking a House size that was proportional to the cube root of population. Here we found that the election results in 2016 would have been unchanged, though the net effects of this rule over the entire time period do reduce the number of inversions by two.

While certainly far from perfect, the EC has proved a robust institution that usually produces clear victories that match the plurality winner. Moreover, the alternatives to it identified above, with the partial exception of a rather large increase in the size of the House of Representatives, have virtually the same flaw in terms of likelihood of creating a reversal between popular vote winner and EC winner, with some even worse. And the two‐seat bonus afforded on the basis of statehood has been shown in this essay to be generally nondeterminative of election outcomes.

Reformers should also acknowledge that the EC “wrong winner” is no less legitimate than any legislation passed by senators representing a minority of the population, or Supreme Court decisions that largely are immune from public opinion, and somewhat less affected by electoral tides due to the long length of service on the Court and the absence of a mandatory age‐linked retirement.38

As if that were not enough reason to be skeptical about the insistence on majoritarianism in the EC, in the process by which the EC would change through constitutional amendment, senators from the 34 states with the smallest population could vote for a change without the input of a popular majority.39 A bill would still need to pass the House regardless of action in the Senate, but extreme gerrymandering also means that a minority of the population can, in effect, carry out a constitutional change. Additionally, when it comes to state ratification, state legislatures are often so severely gerrymandered that a majority of voters fail to elect a majority of legislators, and often seats are so noncompetitive they regularly fail to garner competition at all. Ratification by 38 states is required, and those smallest 38 states amount to just 38.4 percent of the total population.40 While it is clear that reformers who believe only in strict majoritarianism are right to criticize the EC, they should first look to reform the other more disproportionate aspects of the U.S. Constitution.

Without informed examination, one might assume the EC to be an archaic institution that does more harm than good. The EC is not perfect, a fact that the framers were perfectly aware of. All plausible alternatives, except for the popular vote or something that is its equivalent, do not cure the main problem of inversions. Moreover, many have new and severe problems of their own. For example, changes that would eliminate the state‐level winner‐take‐all and move to district unit‐rule would almost definitely lead to political maneuvering and even more extreme gerrymandering (as would increasing the size of the House). And, in an age of hyperpolarization, with the potential for a close national outcome, the direct popular vote creates problems with respect to a proliferation of election challenges. At best the adaptations result in similar outcomes, and at worse could lead to severe constitutional crises. All in all, it is in our opinion that making changes to the system of electing the president should be looked at with a high degree of skepticism.



# Appendix A: Electoral College Google Trends




# Appendix B: Cube Root Adjusted Electoral College

This appendix provides the simulations for an Electoral College (EC) and a number of alternatives by adjusting the total number of electors such that the U.S. House portion is equal to the cube root of the population. As the size of the House increases, disproportionality is reduced. We provide data for the five alternatives that lend themselves to such analyses. Just like the alternatives in the main text of this article, the cube‐root‐based apportionment adjusted reforms produce a similar number of inversions, with only the most proportional alternatives minimizing the occurrences. Still, every alternative in this set produces at least one reversal, with several years being near misfires. In only one year, 1900, is the popular vote margin greater than 2 percent and produces and inversion. We see this as rather redeeming to the EC as currently constructed because only in very close elections is there a legitimate probability of reversal. We also note that 1900 is the last year where apportionment uses 1890 census populations, and that position makes for maximal disproportionality within a given census period.41


#### Table B1. Cube Root Adjusted Electoral College

Cube RootCube RootCube RootCube RootElectoralWhole‐NumberWhole‐NumberFractionalFractionalPopularElectoralCollegeProportionalityProportionalityProportionalityProportionalityVoteCollegeCube Rootwith TwoWithout Twowith TwoWithout TwoYearEC No.(%)(%)(%)Seats (%)Seats (%)Seats (%)Seats (%)186830547.33727.49128.85246.90046.23047.59348.055187231544.06218.03318.7342.41642.85744.18344.699187633651.51849.86451.78651.21452.38151.95952.655188033649.94942.27640.17950.97151.1950.98851.125188436650.29554.61354.91851.58452.18651.27151.422188836650.43041.89540.43753.62052.45952.11552.195189236951.6961.03664.22852.95453.65953.73055.628189639647.79338.92636.61651.02949.74749.73948.632190039646.83234.67634.09150.00050.50549.90149.72190442039.98827.94128.09544.31444.52445.87446.327190842445.49532.29832.07548.4549.52849.56549.684191242564.34495.66996.00069.48270.35367.40467.471191645051.64451.97750.22256.96056.66755.96955.546192045036.11823.91724.44439.19438.44440.95240.703192447234.78525.61225.42438.90838.98340.18540.013192847241.20216.38415.89042.95842.79743.95444.015193247259.14988.88988.77165.49365.04263.12862.874193649662.45998.49398.99268.58168.54865.90565.831194049655.00084.55785.68560.30460.08159.08458.995194450753.77481.35682.44658.37558.38357.57457.679194850752.3762.33561.93354.56154.63553.97353.978195250744.54816.76117.16044.77645.16845.86646.293195653142.24813.93613.93642.58442.18543.73343.849196053150.08359.03261.7750.55550.84750.55550.82196456361.34690.33591.11960.90261.63459.88260.104196856349.59440.52042.62949.17349.55649.55549.754197256338.2143.1603.19735.78935.52437.68437.878197658751.05255.20457.41150.94350.93751.27951.434198058744.6959.1088.00743.97743.61245.05045.341198460940.8302.4162.13539.10039.73740.80341.019198860946.09820.81820.52545.99245.81346.05846.138199260953.45568.77371.75753.58653.69553.50153.703199662854.73570.44672.45254.93255.25554.81955.040200062850.27049.62851.59249.72650.15950.46950.923200465548.75646.84048.85547.95248.70248.70149.000200865553.68867.65870.07653.76554.19853.75854.051201265551.96561.71065.03851.65152.21452.13152.523201667651.11243.30943.78750.90051.18351.21251.785Note: Column 2 (EC No.) is the total number of electors awarded based on the cube root of the population. In 1912, the cube root and actual House size are essentially the same. Since then, the size of the House, which was frozen after this, is smaller than ideal. Shaded cells are those in which the new rule disagrees with the popular vote.

# Appendix C: Formal Definition of the 10 Electoral College Variants Being Compared


We begin with some notation to elucidate how we will measure these EC alternatives. We are interested in all elections since 1868,
. In each year, there is a set of states,
, which all receive a proportion of the EC,
, as determined by the U.S. Constitution.
The equation for the Popular vote C1 is simply,

(C1)which translates into the national summed percentage of votes for the Democratic candidate, with the two‐party vote total in the denominator and third‐party votes excluded. This is, of course, the most proportional to the voters, but not necessarily to the population since turnout rates might vary by state (Grofman, Brunell, and Campagna, 1997). It also happens to be the reform that has generated the most demand since it is the only system that can guarantee a plurality winner takes the office.
The actual EC C2, assuming unit‐rule for all states, is determined by the following equation,

(C2)
The first of the alternatives we consider sets an EC vote share equal to the size of the state's delegation in the U.S. House divided by the total number of seats in the House, that is, an EC with the two‐seat Senate bonus removed. We refer to it as an EC without two‐seat bonus.42
The equation is the same as the EC C2, except every
 is first subtracted by 2.
The second sets the EC vote share as identical to the state's share of the national population, with fractional allocations to allow for (nearly) perfect proportionality, that is, an EC that corrects for both House malapportionment and malapportionment due to the two‐seat Senate bonus. We refer to the second as a State‐unit population proportionality C3. Here, instead of the total electors equaling 538, it is set to 1, or 100 percent, and each state gets exactly the percentage of this EC as their census year population, and the winning candidate is the one who wins enough states such that his share of the states' allocations surpasses 50 percent of the population.

(C3)
In the same way that one might expect campaigns to employ a different strategy than with the EC, a proportionality rule such as a state population allocation might encourage regional candidates or smaller parties to run because it would not be necessary to win a majority of states or votes, since the winner would be the candidate who can attract enough support in a subset of states that is greater than any other candidate. Essentially, even though seats are awarded nearly proportionately, this rule would change the nature of campaigns for the highest office. Any increase in the number of viable candidates who go on to win EC seats would result in the winner of an election winning smaller pluralities. With the winner‐take‐all feature maintained, which results in an unbalanced distribution of votes in some states, we would expect more frequently split popular and electoral votes. For the purposes of this essay, we treat the actual results as if they happened under the alternative rules.
The third proposal is to create an EC that allocates its votes in a proportional or more proportional way to the state's share of the present EC, rather than in terms of winner take all. Here there are two main variants, each of which have two minor distinctions. The first major variant uses the current allocation of EC seats, the second allocates electors based on representation in the House of Representatives, that is, with the two‐seat bonus eliminated. For the minor variations, Whole‐number proportionality C4 for both EC and House delegation sizes are given by the following series of equations:


where the Priority numbers are ordered and the n‐top priority numbers are allocated to each party.

(C4)
The second minor variation is the Fractional proportionality C5, in which electors are abolished, and candidates receive their share of the state‐wide vote rounded to the third decimal. This variant has been proposed numerous times and was actually passed by the U.S. Senate in 1950 under what was known as the Lodge‐Gossett Amendment (S.J. Res. 2 of the 81st Congress). The Fractional proportionality (C5) alternative results is an increase in proportionality from Whole‐number proportionality but yet is less proportional than Popular vote because it sets the number of Electors each state gets but relaxes the unit‐rule nature of the election. It failed ratification in the House of Representatives (Koza et al., 2013). The equation is as follows:

(C5)
The other frequently proposed variant is one in which EC votes are allocated by giving one seat for each House district won, and a two‐seat bonus for the candidate who wins the popular vote in the state. This variation emulates the rules presently practiced in the states of Maine and Nebraska.43
We refer to this as the District rule C6. It has two minor variations, with and without two‐seat bonus.44 It is akin to a plan advocated by Senator Karl E. Mundt (R‐SD), which was opposed by then Senator John F. Kennedy (D‐MA).45
(C6)
District rule with two‐seat bonus sets ω to 2, while the District rule without two‐seat bonus instead sets it to 0.
In addition, in the subsequent section, we briefly consider an additional type of change, one based on the suggestion in Ladewig and Jasinski (2008) that the House size be decennially adjusted to reflect the cube root of U.S. population. The idea is that increasing the size of the House should increase the proportionality of EC outcomes, and hence make the EC vote look more like the popular vote.46

(C7)
Instead of locking the size of the U.S. House at 435, this rule would apportion seats using method of equal proportions (as described in Equation C4), and we replace n with the Cube root House size rounded down to the nearest integer. We can then use the new apportionment to apply to all the alternative EC rules.
